Mapping the Morrill Act
================

## Launching Public Universities in the US

Did you ever wonder how the big public universities in the US like the
University of Michican of University of California got started? Many of
the big state schools got started with the help from the [1862 Morrill
Act](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morrill_Land-Grant_Acts).

During the middle of the Civil War, this act provided support for the
States to establish colleges for “agriculture and the mechanical arts
(engineering)”. At the time, the country needed a lot more engineers for
big infrastructure projects like the railroads and industrialization,
and training for the large number of farmers. Universities of the day
were few, expensive and focused on the liberal arts. Senator Samuel
Morrill had been trying for several years to incentivize the States to
establish more applied colleges, and with the southern States
temporarily out of the Union, he had enough votes. Abraham Lincoln
signed the act on July 2, 1862.

## Incentivizing States

But how exactly do you support States, at various forms of development,
in creating new colleges?

The federal government didn’t have much spare cash at the time, and
everything they had was going to the war. What they did have however was
land, a lot of it, particularly in the large western states like
California where Native Americans had been displaced and decimated by
decades of violence, disease, and fraud. The Federal government was
eager to ‘dispose’ of public lands and get it into the hands of settlers
and coorporations who could put it into production. Land Grants were
quite common in those days, perhaps the famous being the Homestead Act
which was passed just two months before the Morrill Act.

Under the Morrill Act, each State was given 30,000 acres for each
Congressman and Senator. The idea was not that the State would build a
campus on these lands, but they could sell or rent them and use the
money to create an endowment to support the operational costs for a
college. The totals ranged from 990,000 acres for a populous state like
New York, down to a mere 90,000 acres for new states with hardly any
population. 21 western States had enough public land, so they could just
pick unclaimed public land as long as it was surveyed and not mining
land. 27 other states from the east and south didn’t have enough public
land left. So instead, the Morrill Act gave these land ‘scrip’, or
coupons, for an equivalent amount of land that they could sell on the
market, and use the money to support their university. The purchasers of
those coupons could then go to a western State and redeem them for
public lands. Hence public land in States like California was sold to
support running a college not only within California but also states
back east.

Hence the name ‘land grant’ institutions.

# The Morrill Act Map

<http://arcg.is/0Sja0L>

**How the Map Was Made**

This map is derived from the orginal patent records (a patent is like
the original title deed for a piece of land) that were issued by the US
Government Land Office (now the BLM). These documents have been
digitized by the BLM and connected to property boundaries in a GIS
format. The BLM share these data on their website, and a R script was
used to download patents issused under the Morrill Act, and make the
map.

## Caveats

  - For various reasons related mostly to the paper records and very old
    surveying techniques, a small number of patents are not on the map.
  - This map should be taken as a preliminary

# Discussion

Mapping the lands given away under the Morrill Act paints of picture of
the foundation of the land grant system in the US, but it also reveals a
number of other things. Since the vast majority of land allocated under
the act was sold for cash, the distribution reveals where land was both
accessible as well as valued for its agricultural potenial. The timing
of land grants reveals a number of historical processes, including waves
of settler migration, the progress of government surveyors, political
events which shaped when land scrip came on the market, the ebbs and
flows of the land market, and efforts to put the brakes on the biggest
land speculators. When seen in the broader arc of time, the map also
reveals one piece of the chain by which land and resources used and
managed by Native Americans for centuries was taken by force and
repurposed for the private and collective benefit of Euro-Americans.
